This is our second interview with General
Harrington. Today is August 13, I believe. This is
Terry Anderson. Last time we got through your
command of the 823rd Air Division in Florida, and
then we were just starting. your military
assistance advisory group in Japan. Let's
continue talking about that. Tell me what your
functions and duties were there. Well, your
functions as the Air Force chief of the MAG group,
military assistance group, was to provide
technical assistance to the Chief of Staff of the
Japanese Air Defense Force. Oh, that's right,
yeah. And to also provide logistics support and
spare parts, things of this sort, to keep their
airplanes flying. Right, yeah. Yeah, we were
talking about this yesterday. And you were
talking about the relationships that you had, or
the relations that you had with the Japanese
bureaucrats now that Japan was an independent
nation. Could you touch on that? Well you had
almost a twice a week meeting with the chief of
staff of the Japanese Air Defense Force General
Sanagi and I would say at least once a month
my staff along with my staff would make field trips
go out to the various Japanese bases and really get
on the spot look at how they were doing rather than
just looking at the mechanics, statistics that
were sent in. And I probably operated a little
differently because in my inspection procedures
I would open drawers and open doors that were
closed just to see what was what kind of skeletons
were in the closets. And as I mentioned yesterday,
this is where I found numerous
starters, generators, spare parts that were
inoperable, but could be repaired. And although
the Japanese didn't particularly like that
method, they condoned it. Say the American
taxpayers, I would imagine. What did your
superiors think of that? Well, they thought that
was a real good idea. I mean, because they really
hadn't thought about the fact that the Japanese
labor pay scale was such that they could
economically repair these if the United States
provided them with the bits and pieces to do the
overhauling. And we established a program like
that. How did you get along with the Japanese
people now that you went back ten years after?
Well, the Japanese
people were always, to me, very courteous. I'm
sure that we in the United States would have been
belligerent whereas the Japanese thought well we
must have something and they wanted to copy us. And
I got along with the Japanese real well. What was
the quality of their Air Force in the late 1950s?
Well they really had, see we
provided them with the F-86. Now the F-86 was an
obsolete airplane, almost. It's what you'd
probably call a second line airplane when we ride
it with them. And it was probably a good stepping
stone. It certainly wasn't up to the F-100 that we
were using on our bases. But it was a real good
training vehicle.
I would say that we got our money's worth out of the
F-86s that we provided them. Did they complain
that they were getting second rate or used
equipment? No, I mean, I guess they didn't want to
look a gift horse in the mouth. They were being
given to them, so they were... And we provided
logistic support for them. And, of course, we
shipped them a lot of stuff that they probably
didn't need, like when the F-86 was first
purchased while we anticipated so many wing
changes. Well, it didn't turn out that we needed
nearly as much replacement wings as we
anticipated, but we shipped the Japanese all
these wings, so they had to store them. So we had
warehouse after warehouse full of wings that
would never do really them any good. What'd they do
with them? What'd they do? They stored them.
Probably still have them. Yeah, they still have
them. And the other thing with the Japanese and
looking back at them, we provided them with
computers on stock control and things of this
sort. But they really didn't at that time believe
in computers. They still kept everything by hand.
Every, almost every nut bolt and screw that when we
repaired an airplane why we had a bench stock that
we just rolled out to the airplane and used
whatever we needed and when we got back in why
somebody replaced, poured some more screws in
there without counting them or anything of this
sort. Japanese they counted every bolt, every
screw, everything that was used. I mean it's, they
did it very meticulous.
And so they kept our system and they continued to
use their old system that they had been using for
years and years and years. I bet you were happy to
become the commander of the 39th Air Division to
get your own command again. Yeah, I worked at that.
How? Well, I went over to see Joan Burns and see if he
had an opening. And they kept in touch with the
commander of 5th Air Force. And I was always out. I
had to go out to see him at least once a week anyway on
briefing monostas of the Japanese air because
they were part of the defense of Japan. And we
depended on them to
patrol certain segments of certain areas of
Japan. And so I was out there about once a week to a
staff meeting. So I just... To give them the elbow.
Yeah, well, that's part of your duty, and also
during that time you could promote
a job. Now, let's talk about Japanese air
defenses. What percentage of the total air
defense was American? What percent was Japanese.
How'd you work that relationship? Oh, I would say
that during that period of time they were just
becoming combat. I would probably estimate maybe
25 percent. Like the Japanese had Hokkaido and
Misawa was the most northern American base. So we
turned over all of the the air defense of Hokkaido
to them.
Then there were other areas over on the Sea of Japan
that they had air bases over there that they could
scramble fighters for intercept.
So it was Well, we were tied into their air command
and their control centers too. It was just a joint
cooperative effort, sort of like NATO? Well,
yeah, you had, like Basava, we had an air division
headquarters of the Japanese Air Self Defense
Force, and then we had an air division
headquarters of the Air Force. And jointly we had a
control center. And we ran a control center next
door. The Japanese ran their control center so
that they all were just tied together. And of
course, we and
our GCA,
our ground controlled approaches, instrument
landing type of thing, why the Japanese had their
own and we had our own. The Japanese, we taught them
English. Yeah, I was going to ask about that. What
about the language barrier? But when the Japanese
really got into stress of why they'd go to
Japanese, so you didn't know what they were saying
particularly. Was there much of a language
barrier?
I would say the same as in almost any foreign
country where you have a completely foreign
language. I took a language course in Japanese and
my wife did so that we at least could talk to the
politicians or the individuals who didn't speak
any English at all. Oh, could you? I mean, you could
start a conversation? Yeah, you could carry on a
reasonable conversation as to the courtesies of
the day. And they gave you a sort of a staff and wife
officer program? Or how did they work it? And was it
stressed? This is through the Air Force, right?
No, well, the wives and getting back to the mag.
Yeah. While Johnson Augie and all his chiefs,
their wives would come out and take cooking
lessons from the Americans. Really? Oh, yeah. Oh,
yeah. So they... From the American wives? Yeah,
from my wife and... and the other members of the MAG
staff. And they in turn would run a
Japanese-English course. And then of course I had
as my right hand a Nisi that was fluent in Japanese
and fluent in English. So, and he accompanied me
almost every, he did accommodate me everywhere I
went. So, you always had somebody who could bail
you out as far as the language program was
concerned. And you had the same thing. Was he a
civilian or was he in the Air Force? He was a
civilian. He was a civilian.
all properties, GS-9, GS-11. He was a civil
service civilian. He was American.
And then each section, the operations, and each
one of them had an interpreter so that when they
went out by themselves, they could take someone
with them. You were talking earlier about Curtis
LeMay and how he stressed how important it was for
the staff wives to welcome others into the Air
Force community, things like that. And then you
mentioned again here about your wife and the wives
of the Japanese generals getting together. Was
there a lot of this social contact with the
Japanese and with the relations very good in that
sense? Oh, yeah. When I was on the embassy staff at
that time, you had, you were always a lot more than I
really enjoyed. Cocktail parties, or anybody who
came in, high ranking Air Force,
my Japanese always wine and diamond. and you were a
part of that program. And then of course the Cherry
Blossom time, they always invited you to, gave you
tickets to that and you got a grand reception and
a front seat on that time. No, they pampered you
quite a bit. Well, I mean it was in their best
interest that they do pamper you quite a bit. And
that was just, it seemed to me, part of your duty.
And when you got up to 5th Air Force, it was more of a
formal type of thing. When a Japanese general came
up to inspect the Japanese, sometimes they
wouldn't even contact you. However,
At Misawa we established a maintenance program
that,
well we went nine months without an aircraft
accident, but a single airplane accident. So the
Japanese were very interested in that. So
everybody and his brother from the Japanese Air
Defense Force came up to copy what you were looking
at. What were you doing? What were you doing right?
Nine months you had, as a commander of the 39th Air
Division, you had 100 jet aircraft and you had nine
months without a single accident. You must have
been doing something right. Well, the first thing
I did when I first got up there is, and you probably
couldn't do that in this day and age, but I had the
judge give me a list of all the names of individuals
who had been picked up drunken disorderly at least
two times and any other serious offense. And I
just, and then I had... Enlisted men and officers?
Enlisted, no, the highest ranking was a
lieutenant colonel.
And there were various type of offenses. sleeping
with a Japanese girl when he had a wife and kids and
this type of thing. I mean, I just didn't tolerate
that type of thing. So I just shipped them all home.
Really? Oh, yeah. You could ship them all. I
shipped about 250 home. You shipped 250? How many
you had here as the commander? You had 13,000
personnel here. as a commander under your
responsibility. And you shipped 250 of them home,
officers and men? Two officers and men. And a lot of
these men were career men. Well, see, General
Burns, when he gave me the job, he said, Tex, I'll
give you three months. And that outfit up there is
being operated kind of a country club. and their
accident rate was about to worsen the Air Force.
Really? And so I granted all the airplanes, first
thing. And then I talked to every— Okay, why did you
do that? Well, because they were— Why did you
ground them all immediately? Weren't properly
maintained. Okay, okay. You wanted to get them
back on a maintenance schedule. Then I got the
master sergeants, the supervisors, and we
unbuttoned. every airplane inspected gave them a
real thorough inspection and looked for cracks
and so you got all the technical man you got all the
people out of the offices who were real
professionals out on the front line looking at
airplanes and then then you took this program of
shipping all these people home and and that really
is very drastic. It goes over the base real
thoroughly. I
remember the day I arrived up there I was picked up
at the airport and I was driving to my quarters and
there was some sergeant that just looked at you and
you had a star on your and he didn't salute, didn't
do anything. So I stopped, backed up, and got out
and chewed him out a little bit. Was he a guard? No,
he was just a sergeant, just looking. Maybe he was
so shocked to see a general coming in. Well, he had a
general commanded before.
And then one of the squadron commanders, I picked
him up on base for speeding. I was following him in
my civilian car at the time. It was probably two or
three weeks later. And I chewed him out. And of
course the Lois and the two girls were with me then,
so they kind of ducked down. They didn't want
anybody to see them while I was doing my duty. And I
just didn't want anybody who was going out getting
drunk all night and working on airplanes during
the daytime.
In fact, I had a young airman come in. He said, I
said, John, I said, I'm sorry that I'm going home. I
wish I, well, I weren't, but I'm sure that if you had
been here, I wouldn't be sent home. I mean, the
standards were such that you just thought that was
the thing to do, or no one really cared. What did you
say, how did you answer that? Well I said, well I'm
sorry you have to go home too, but I said that's the
way, I said you can get over this, it's no problem. I
mean being sent home before being drunk is
disorderly, why if you just take it in stride and
not,
make you think that you are a complete failure.
Why, you're really not. I mean, it's just one of
those obstacles that you have to face. What rank
was this? This is an enlisted man? Oh, he was about a
corporal or something. A real clean-cut young
man. And you could, you probably could have begged
exception. But you make an exception to him, why do
you have to beg exception to everybody else? And
we worked out pretty well, because only Only about
two or three congressional inquiries came in. You
always had the problem of congressional
inquiries. Somebody's parents write their
congressman, and your congressman writes their
secretary of defense, and the secretary of
defense comes on down. It just happened that the
three that they inquired about were the worst
offenders. I mean, you know, therefore, I got off
real... And I'll agree that we probably sent 25%
home that we could have... of
probably improve and they would have never done it
again. Now what do you mean when you say you sent
them home? You sent them to a base in the States? No,
you had authority on the Air Force regulations at
the time to discharge individuals who did not
become accustomed to the Air Force live. It was a
real easy program to have. So these people were
discharged? They were discharged from the Air
Force. Dishonorable or undesirable or general?
Undesirable. Really? Well, I say a general. It
wasn't a good conduct discharge. It was the next
lower level. A general discharge? Yeah.
And then after you get your airplanes inspected,
and then after you get the people who are carousing
out of your way, well then you can start building an
Air Force. And before I went up there, I'd gone over
to the Fifth Air Force and made up little cards on
each individual, and got a picture, and also what
is the, efficiency reports were, so that when I got
up there, I knew who the officers were that had the
most, that had the best record, and the captains,
the majors, the lieutenant colonels. And so I
looked at the standpoint of the standardization
team that tested everybody, all the pilots, as to
whether or not they were doing a good job. And I got
rid of the ones that were average and put in the
outstanding pilots that had the best records in
there. And then we started through and tested
every pilot. We tested every pilot. And my
position was on emergency exams, 98 is not good
enough. I mean, you have to make 100. If you have an
emergency exam and you fail two procedures, why,
you just... Yeah, so you just, I insisted on 100%.
And we set up some skill programs like tic-tac-toe
programs so that each pilots would test each other
by... by questions on airplane systems and flying
techniques and things of this sort against each
other. I got the wives clubs and the NCO wives clubs
involved in setting up a
ward program so that your crew chief who had had his
airplane on the line ready to fly and flew his
mission in any one month, why you give him a void of a
hundred dollars or a trip for he and his wife down to
Tokyo and this type of thing. I bet you that
increased morale. Oh yeah. And whether or not they
were colored or white or what have you didn't
really make any difference. The procedure was
that the one that Well, I set up a program, and this
is a SAC program, what you'd call a tail number
schedule. Each airplane had a number, 1, 2, 7, 6, 7,
7, 6, 8, 7, 6, 9, on down. And then on the first of the
month, prior to the first of the month, you'd set up
a schedule. That airplane was going to fly on the
3rd, the 8th, the 14th, the 4-hour mission, or
whatever the mission was. And if the crew chief had
that airplane ready to fly on the day they were
scheduled to fly, and it flew all its missions
during the month,
then he was in competition for the best crew chief
on base. And then the other thing is whatever
discrepancies the pilot wrote up at the end of the
mission. And then you'd get down and he flew his
missions and no discrepancies as well. So
sometimes you'd have a tie. But anyway, that got
the airplanes in good condition. Where'd you get
the money for this, to send the guy and his wife down
to Tokyo? Well, the Oscars Wives Club and the NCO
Wives Club, see, they had programs and cake sales
and they had... They raised the money. I didn't
care how they raised it. And then the commanders,
each commander had a, I shouldn't call it a slush
fund, he had a commander's fund that he could use
for either entertainment or visiting
dignitaries or what
have you. And that was a big thing. Go down and pay
somebody's train trip down and you had hotels in
Tokyo that were taken over by the Air Force so they
could stay at a rest hotel at two dollars a day or
something of this sort. So that was a good big, big
boost on morale. And then you work on the wives. The
pilots, well if they drink a little too much one
particular day why then he says they shouldn't be
really be flying the next day so so you depending on
the wives to help you out if he's going to fly the
next day why keep him keep him off the bottle during
the day during the night or during that evening and
and did you go around and talk to the wives or did you
oh i talked to i had a meeting of all the wives and
that's one of the uh speeches as I let you read on
that Basava wasn't as bad as all this, that
happiness is not where you is, not a matter of
geography type of thing. I made a talk to all the
incoming wives and And I was probably... Of
officers and enlisted? And enlisted. My
goodness, you had 1,700 families there. Yeah, but
see... You would have been talking almost every
day. Well, no, 1,700, see, but you... Families,
yeah. You just talk to them one time, and then you
only talk to the ones that are coming in, the
replacements, see? So maybe in one month, maybe
you had only 20 new families arrive. So it's not
really that... I see. So you just set up a meeting
for those 20 at the end of the month? Yeah, you just
set up a meeting and talked to the NCO wives and the
officers' wives together, new families that came
in. And you also normally talk to the officers and
enlisted men who came in to get them. When I first
arrived up there, I talked to every, I made a speech
to every every individual on base. Tell them that
I'm not the former commander. I'm a different type
of individual. And I gave my
philosophy on that I really didn't mind people
drinking, but I detested the drunk. I mean, this
type of thing. And that I expected if you're going
to be pilot, I expect you to be the best pilot. And
we're going to make this the best base in the Air
Force. And we're going to not have any accidents. I
mean it's just absolutely ridiculous to have an
accident when an engine quits or something of this
sort
when it could be aborted. And I preach a little
conservatism that if something was wrong with
your airplane, don't push on. Come back to base and
land. The safest place is on the ground and there
will be another day to fly. And
so they brought back airplanes that had to be
continued while probably the engine would have
quit or something of that sort. So
you set up competition between squadrons on
bombing competition and efficiency programs.
And you had the best pilots. You had a roster in each
squadron listing the best pilot, the best bombing
pilot, and then the fighters. And so you could have
them competing against each other. And it worked
real good, I mean actually. And we had, well we had a
lot of
colored pilots at that time, not a lot I'd say, but
we had- About what percentage? Oh I'd say maybe,
well one of the squadrons,